OK, so now we're going to go on to the next big topic of collections, and that is regarding the set
interface.
But before we dive in too deeply on the set interface, I want to do a little bit of housekeeping with
you.
So if you go back in to the main class, we've been putting a lot of little test code here in there
and I think we should go ahead and clean that out a bit.
So starting from the top here if I scroll down.
So we've got this first little loop where we're just taking the employees and and putting them into
this list, right?
And then we've got a lot of little code where we were playing around with basically sorting and ordering
the employees and things of that sort.
And then we've got some more stuff that's commented out and then we've got another loop down here where
we're actually adding up the salaries.
And then a couple of lines where we were actually formatting a number for creating a number format and
then printing out.
So let's uncomment the creation of the number formatter and printing out the value there.
Let's uncomment those and then this other stuff here where we were experimenting with the Java record
and a few things like that, and I think we can get rid of those lines.
So I'm going to select all of those into a command, delete or control way.
And then up above, I think we can get rid of everything that isn't this loop from from below the loop.
So all of this down to down to where the loop the next loop begins.
Think we can get rid of all of that?
So I'm just going to hold down on the shift key and then click on Line sixty two on my on my I.D. to
select all of this and then delete, command, delete or control away.
And so what we should have now is this loop that's populating the list.
And then another loop before loop that is adding up the salaries and then we're just printing those
out.
And let's go ahead and just run this again and make sure nothing is broken.
OK, cool.
I see the familiar 8.6 million there, so I think we're I think we're good there.
All right.
So now that we've done that, I think we're oh, and one more thing too.
We could also clean up these import statements or organize the imports, I think, is what the ad calls
that.
And to do that, we can do a control option O or a control alt o on Windows and Linux.
So we've got a nice clean page now.
OK.
So the first thing I want to do in preparation to learn about the set interface is first.
Let's open back up the the output window from running this, or we can just run it again.
All right.
So I'm going to make this a little wider.
So I think we should have what like 16 items in here to.
To be sure, though, let's come down to where we're printing out the total.
And let's add one more line here where we will print out the size of the employees collection.
All right.
So let's just we can do maybe a system that our print line and then I don't want to do anything fancier.
So I'm just going to reference employees that size and then let's run that again.
OK, so we've got 17, according to this.
All right, cool.
17.
Right now that we've got that, here's the first thing we want to do in preparation to go learn about
the list interface, I'm thinking.
Let's grab a programmer and I'm thinking, maybe just keep it simple and I'm going to put my cursor
on this first line here for Fred Flintstone, just the original Fred Flintstone, and I'm going to just
duplicate this line.
Maybe, I don't know, five times.
OK, so I can do that with a Command D or a control D on Windows and Linux.
A one two three four five.
All right.
So I just want to duplicate.
One of these employees several times.
And now let's run our code again and confirm what that count will now be.
OK, so now I have a count of twenty two, so we had 17 and now it's 22.
Good.
Now we're ready to play around with the list interface, OK?
So first off, what is a set right?
What is the set interface?
What is a set?
What is it modeling?
What kind of behavior?
Well, so let me go back real quick and say so.
What we learned about the list is that it is an interface that models a data structure that can hold
a number of items or objects in some type of order, and we can access or get those items back out with
an index.
OK.
So lists are all about keeping items in a list and they can grow dynamically.
So those are the main things that we learned about the list, right?
And then we learned a couple of implementations the array list, which is backed by an array and then
the linked list, which uses pointers essentially to to point to each node in the list.
And they have their pros and cons depending on what you're trying to do.
Right?
All right.
So now the set interface models a structure that can also hold a collection of items or objects.
However, one of the main things about a set is that it tries to guarantee that there will be no duplicates.
OK, so lists, as we see here, allow for some notion of duplicate.
We just duplicated a number of employees here and we went from having 17 to 20 to right.
So it just lets you put whatever you want.
So a set, though, tries to weed out duplicates.
Now the reason I say it tries to is because, as we will learn shortly here, it depends on how we wrote
our code.
And we spent a little time in the last few lessons learning about equals.
And I touched very, very briefly on hash code.
But I told you I would save hash code for another lesson, right?
So the equals in hash code methods come in even more when we're dealing with sets and we're about to
see that.
So here's what we're going to do if we scroll down to where we are creating our list and the array list,
right?
So we've got this collection here.
The first thing I want to do is actually change these.
And so we're no longer going to use any type of list.
Instead, let's use the set and just see what happens, right?
So I'm going to select the list here and just replace it with the word set.
And now I have to import that.
So I'm going to just hold down on my option return and import the set.
Interface.
And then over here.
I'm going to select the array list and replace this now.
There are three primary implementations of the set interface in Java.
We have the most commonly used one, I would say, which is the hash set.
And then we have the tree set and we have the linked hash set.
We're going to start off just with using the hash set because, like I said, that's possibly the most
commonly used one.
One of the reasons it's probably the most commonly used is because it's the fastest default type of
set implementation there is.
So let's start off with that.
So hash set just like that, and then we'll need to import it.
There we go.
And I'm going to get rid of the capacity there.
All right, so we'll just let it use its default behavior for now.
And already, let's notice a couple of things, so those are the only two things we needed to change
so far, right?
Everything else seems to be cool, right?
We didn't have to change any code which goes to show that all of the interfaces and collection classes
that are related to collection have enough in common with each other that a lot of the times you don't
need to make a lot of major code changes if you coded wisely to begin with.
So in our case, we're still coding to an interface.
The interface is set.
The implementation of the interface in this case is hash set right, so we're still coding to interface.
The add method still works the same.
So that's nice.
The enhanced for Loop still works the same, so now this is a hash set or a set.
But the enhanced for loop doesn't care.
It's able to iterate over this.
All the same.
So those are a few key things to note.
Their lists and sets have a lot of basic methods that are common to each other.
And so that's convenient.
All right.
So let's run this and see what we get.
Oh, look at that.
We're back to 17 again, so this just goes to show right off the bat that a set can automatically filter
out duplicates.
Again, if your code is written properly and I'm going to show you how it can be improperly written
in just a moment, but if it's written properly, we can use a set to filter out duplicates.
And so if we actually move this little pane up, in fact, what we will find here is that we won't see
any of those duplicates.
So that's kind of cool.
Now one thing, though, that is worth noting is that although we don't see the duplicates, let's pay
attention to the order that we're seeing here.
So if I scroll this back up, so here we're adding the then we're adding these employees in in the order
in which you see right, Fred Flintstone multiple times and then two, three, four and five and then
Barney rubble and then Wilma, et cetera.
So interestingly, here it does start off with a Fred Flintstone.
And then it's filtering out all of the duplicates.
But then it seems to skip over Flintstone, two and two, three and four, because then we see Flintstone
five and then it goes to Betty rubble.
Who in our list here is the last one, but here she's like the third, right?
So in other words, the items are not are not coming back out of the loop in the same order in which
we added them.
And that is very typical of the hash set implementation of a set.
If I go to where we're creating that, yeah, right here, that is fairly typical of the hash that implementation
of a set.
It does not guarantee a predictable order for the items that you're adding, so you can add them in
whatever order you want.
But when you get them back out, you will not likely get them out.
In the same order in which you added them is highly unlikely.
And the reason for that has to do with the way that the hash set is actually working.
So hash that associates a so-called hash code with each item that is added in to it.
This hash code, in turn, can be added to a mathematical process to derive an index, which is really
just a number, and that index or a number become becomes a row number in a table.
So a hash set associates each item in it with a hash code.
A hash code is really just a number that should be fairly unique for each item that we're adding to
the hash set, though there can be what are called collisions, where two or more items may result in
the same hash code.
These hash codes, in turn, can be used to generate a row number, which is effectively an index,
and it is by these indexes that the items are that the items that have been added to the hash that are
ultimately ordered.
And because that happens via the hash code, that means that generally speaking, the order in which
we add items to a hash set is not the order in which they will come back out.
When we're iterating over it, that's because those items result in a hash code.
That hash code results in an index, and it is only by that index that everything gets ordered generally.
Let me show you what that looks like in a spreadsheet.
OK, so here I have a very simplified view of a few of our employee records, and we see this table
here.
So underneath the hood, the hash set is actually utilizing another structure that will learn more about
in an upcoming lesson called a hash map.
But basically, it's a list with two columns in this particular case.
The first column has our hash codes, which are also thought of as a key into the hash map.
Key is just the way that you can look up something.
So imagine like when you go to a restaurant or some type of event, a formal event where they have a
coat and hat check, you can check in your coat.
They will give you a little ticket or something like that.
You can think of that ticket as a key.
It's a it's a smaller, simpler representation of the bigger thing.
In this case, small representation for the bigger thing being your coat in code here.
This is a smaller representation for the potentially larger object that we are storing in the hash set
or, in this case, in the hash map.
All right.
So these hash codes can be applied to a simple formula or process that converts them into an index or
a row number.
And so we can see these little row numbers here on the side, right?
And because it is ultimately the ROE number that is derived from the hash code that determines the order
of the items or objects, those items or objects may not be in the same order in which we added them.
OK.
Does that make sense, even though really, I probably should have depicted this table with these employees
in a different order?
So sort of ignore the fact that I happen to be showing them in somewhat of a proper order here in real
life, they probably wouldn't be.
Now you should be wondering, why do we even bother with this hash code business at all?
Right?
A list could just be used with just one column, which is just the objects themselves.
So the issue here is when we want to use this type of collection to do a couple of operations.
One of those operations is to call the containers method.
So let's say that we have an object in hand, so to speak, which is basically Barney rubble for OK.
And we want to ask this collection if Barney Rubble four is contained within it.
So if we were just using a list, then what would generally have to happen is some code would have to
iterate over each row in that list, calling the equals method to determine if the object in hand Barney
for Barney Rubble four is equal to the current object that we are iterating over, right?
And so that code would in this case, that code might have to iterate over each of these items before
it finds a match.
Now, imagine if this collection had millions of objects in it that could take a while to find a match,
right?
The same is also true for the remove method.
If we wanted to remove an item from the collection based on an item that we have in hand.
You pretty much have to do the exact same thing.
You have to iterate over each looking for a match and only if and when we find a match, we then know
that we can remove that item from the collection.
So the amount of time that can take is not constant.
Right?
If the item you're trying to find for, contains or remove is towards the end of the list, then that
will take longer than if it's at the beginning of the list, right?
And you have to sit there and iterate through most of the list or the whole entire list.
However, if we use a hash set to do this same thing, here's what would happen.
We first determine the hash code for the item that we have in hand.
OK, and then the hash set will take that hash code and determine an index from that hash code.
OK.
So in our example of Barney for rubble for the hash code might yield an index of 10.
And so now the code doesn't need to iterate through each and every item in the collection.
It can just jump straight to the 10th row and then simply determine if the item in hand is equal to
the item on that 10th row.
If so, then you've got a match and now you can say it does contain or you can remove it or whatever
it is that that needs to happen.
The beauty of that approach is whether you find a match on the first element or the 100 millionth element
or whatever.
It should take the same amount of time to find that match.
And so the access time is constant with a hash set, and that's a huge advantage, particularly if the
collection is very large.
All right.
So in the next lesson, we will dig in more on where these hash codes are coming from.
And we'll also play around more with some code, so I'll see you in the next one.